---
date: "2006-01-09 12:00:00"
title: "Hasty benchmarking of various programming languages"
---



[Michael wants his CPU cycles back!](https://expert-opinion.blogspot.com/2006/01/give-me-back-my-cycles.html) Anyhow, using some benchmarking, we can make comparisons between languages (or rather, some implementations). Here are some possible conclusions (using an AMD CPU which is what I own):

- Python is faster than Perl.
- Python is faster than Ruby by a wide margin.
- Python is much faster than PHP .
- C++ is faster than Lisp and uses much less memory and Lisp is much faster than Python but Lisp uses more memory.
- C++ is generally slightly faster than Java, but not always though Java uses a lot more memory.
- PHP and Ruby are pretty much on par but Ruby uses less memory.
- JavaScript is slightly faster than PHP but Perl is faster than JavaScript.
- Lisp and Java are on par.
- Lisp is slightly faster than Haskell, but not always.
- C++ is faster than Haskell, but not always.
- Haskell and Java are pretty much on par, but Java uses much more memory.
- the famous Intel C/C++ compiler is on par with GCC (Parand points out the benchmarking involves AMD processors!).
- Ocaml is on par with C++.
- Ocaml is much faster than Haskell.
- Ocaml is better than Java.
- Ocaml is better than Lisp.


The lessons here are:

- Java is fast, as fast as C++ but its memory usage is worse than a language like Python.
- Python is one of the fastest high level languages out there, but Perl is close behind.
- PHP and Ruby are slow.
- Languages like Lisp, Ocaml and Haskell can sometimes be used as replacement for C++ even when performance is a concern.
- GCC is a good enough compiler.


Yes, I&rsquo;m aware of the limitations of this analysis!!!

